                                                                          Unlock
                                                                    exclusive benefits



ITIL
                                                                   with PeopleCert Plus!
             ®
                                                                      Join Now!


Product                VERSION 5




Global Best Practice
         For all organizations and people aiming
         to create excellent digital products!




Sample
Paper 1
Answers and Rationales




                                             Official Training Materials
Published by PeopleCert International Limited
Published in Cyprus
Publication printed in Greece or reproduced electronically in Greece

Version 5.0 (March 2026)

Copyright © 2026 PeopleCert International Limited and its affiliates (“PeopleCert”)
All rights reserved. No part of this document or the information in it may be copied, distributed, disclosed or used other than as authorized by
PeopleCert. Information identified as being under a Creative Commons license may be used in accordance with that license. ITIL®, PRINCE2®,
DEVOPS INSTITUTE ®, LANGUAGECERT®, and the Swirl logo are registered trademarks of PeopleCert.

Disclaimer
This publication is designed to provide helpful information to the recipient. Although care has been taken by PeopleCert in preparation of this
publication, no representation or warranty (either express or implied) is given by PeopleCert with respect to the completeness, accuracy or suitability of
the information or advice contained within it, and PeopleCert shall not be held responsible for any loss or damage whatsoever relating to such
information or advice.




2     ITIL® Product | Sample Paper 1 Answers and Rationales | Copyright © PeopleCert International Limited
Question   Answer     Assessment               Rationales
                      Criteria
1          C          1.1.4                    A. Incorrect. The lifecycle does not define a fixed
                                               sequence that must be followed for all products.
                                               “Value streams: are the actual sequence of activities
                                               performed, rather than a predetermined blueprint.”
                                               Ref 11.4
                                               B. Incorrect. The lifecycle model integrates product
                                               and service management rather than separating
                                               them. “ITIL offers an end-to-end Lifecycle Model for
                                               digital products and services, where the concepts of
                                               digital product and service are integrated.” Ref 1.2
                                               C. Correct. This describes an integrated lifecycle
                                               model that applies shared stages across roles
                                               and operating models to support holistic
                                               product and service management. “The ITIL
                                               Product and Service Lifecycle includes eight
                                               stages. To manage digital products and services
                                               throughout the lifecycle […] organization’s role
                                               in service relationships.” Ref 2.1.2
                                               D. Incorrect. The lifecycle encompasses the end-to-
                                               end management of both digital products and
                                               digital services. It is not limited to describing
                                               transition and operation activities after products are
                                               built. “Digital product management (the
                                               management of digital product throughout their
                                               end-to-end lifecycle) and digital service
                                               management (the management of digital services
                                               throughout their end-to-end lifecycle) are both
                                               required to enable sustainable value for customers.”
                                               Ref 2.1
2          A          1.1.1                    A. Correct. Digital products are combinations of
                                               organizational resources that provide
                                               capabilities, while digital services are how those
                                               capabilities are used and consumed to realize
                                               value. “Products provide capabilities, while
                                               service offerings describe the potential value
                                               they offer to customers. When customers accept
                                               these offerings, service delivery and
                                               consumption begin.” Ref 2.1.1
                                               B. Incorrect. Value is realized through service
                                               consumption, not merely through the existence of a
                                               product. Also, digital services are not limited to
                                               internal operations. “Products provide capabilities,
                                               while service offerings describe the potential value
                                               they offer to customers. When customers accept
                                               these offerings, service delivery and consumption
                                               begin.” Ref 2.1.1
                                               C. Incorrect. Digital products are defined as
                                               combinations of resources, and services are where
                                               outcomes and value are experienced by consumers.
                                               A digital product is “a combination of an
                                               organization’s resources based on digital technology
                                               and designed to offer value to consumers.” Ref 2.1
                                               D. Incorrect. Digital product and digital service are
                                               distinct concepts with different roles in value
                                               creation. A digital product is “a combination of an



                    ITIL® Product | Sample Paper 1 Answers and Rationales | Copyright © PeopleCert International Limited   3
Question            Answer           Assessment               Rationales
                                     Criteria
                                                              organization’s resources based on digital technology
                                                              and designed to offer value to consumers,” while a
                                                              digital service is “a service that fully or largely relies
                                                              on digital products.” Ref 2.1
3                   B                1.1.6                    A. Incorrect. Governance influences and constrains
                                                              decisions, but the value chain is not defined as a
                                                              governance structure. “Formal governance
                                                              structures support cross-functional alignment,
                                                              accountability, and decision‑making bandwidth.”
                                                              Ref 5.4.1
                                                              B. Correct. The value chain is not a governance
                                                              layer, nor a replacement for lifecycle stages; it is
                                                              the mechanism through which lifecycle
                                                              management activities are carried out to enable
                                                              value creation. Value chain is “an entire set of
                                                              activities that enables value through the
                                                              provision of a product or service.” Ref Glossary
                                                              C. Incorrect. The value chain does not reduce
                                                              lifecycle stages to operational process execution.
                                                              The value chain enables the management of digital
                                                              products and services across all lifecycle stages,
                                                              including ‘discover’, ‘design’, ‘build’, ‘transition’,
                                                              ‘deliver’, ‘operate’, and ‘support’ activities.
                                                              Operational execution is only one part of the
                                                              lifecycle. Aligning lifecycle stages directly with
                                                              operational processes ignores the broader
                                                              management capabilities and value-enabling
                                                              activities required throughout the entire lifecycle.
                                                              “The operating model’s core is its value chain: a set
                                                              of activities that enables value through the provision
                                                              of a product or service.” Ref 2.1.2
                                                              D. Incorrect. Value chain activities are not
                                                              sequenced into a fixed, linear process. They are
                                                              combined and adapted as part of value streams,
                                                              reflecting the actual sequence of activities
                                                              performed rather than a predetermined structure.
                                                              “Value streams: are the actual sequence of activities
                                                              performed, rather than a predetermined blueprint”
                                                              Ref 11.4
4                   D                1.2.1                    A. Incorrect. ‘The ‘discover’ activity is not a one-time
                                                              activity performed only at the beginning of the
                                                              lifecycle. It is explicitly described as continual and
                                                              iterative. “The ‘discover’ activity, from a product
                                                              vendor’s perspective, is a continual, iterative activity
                                                              that defines which digital products to build, evolve,
                                                              or retire, and why these decisions make sense in the
                                                              broader organizational, market, and ecosystem
                                                              context.” Ref 3.1.2
                                                              B. Incorrect. Although ‘discover’ can be performed at
                                                              organizational and portfolio levels, it is not exclusive
                                                              to them. Product-level ‘discover’ is central to digital
                                                              product management. “The ‘discover’ activity is
                                                              performed at three levels: Organizational level […]
                                                              Portfolio level […] Product level.” Ref 3.1




4   ITIL® Product | Sample Paper 1 Answers and Rationales | Copyright © PeopleCert International Limited
Question   Answer     Assessment               Rationales
                      Criteria
                                               C. Incorrect. The ‘discover’ activity frames and
                                               informs subsequent lifecycle stages but does not
                                               replace them. “It connects an organization’s vision
                                               and strategy with actionable product portfolio
                                               decisions and thus frames all subsequent lifecycle
                                               stages of the digital products.” Ref 3.1.2
                                               D. Correct. The focus of the ‘discover’ activity at
                                               product level is to ensure ongoing alignment of
                                               product capabilities and service offerings with
                                               consumer needs and organizational strategy,
                                               which inherently informs future product
                                               direction and evolution. “The purpose of the
                                               ‘discover’ activity is to ensure continual
                                               alignment of the product capabilities and
                                               related service offerings with the needs of
                                               service consumers and with organizational
                                               strategy.” Ref 3.1.1
5          C          1.2.2                    A. Incorrect. Defining customer needs and
                                               prioritizing opportunities is the purpose of ‘discover’,
                                               not ‘design’. “The purpose of the ‘discover’ activity is
                                               to ensure continual alignment of the product
                                               capabilities and related service offerings with the
                                               needs of service consumers and with the
                                               organizational strategy.” Ref 3.1.1
                                               B. Incorrect. Product and service design are
                                               inseparable in digital product management. “Digital
                                               product design should always include designing the
                                               future service interactions and service experience,
                                               so it is in fact ‘digital product and service design’.”
                                               Ref 4.1
                                               C. Correct. ‘Design’ is broader than user
                                               experience or functional specification. Products
                                               and services are designed so they can be built,
                                               operated, delivered, and supported, not just
                                               implemented. “The ‘design’ activity aims to
                                               design products that are not only valuable and
                                               desirable to users, but also operable,
                                               supportable, and sustainable for the
                                               organization.” Ref 4.1.1
                                               D. Incorrect. Defining implementation tasks belongs
                                               primarily to ‘build’ and ‘transition’, not ‘design’.
                                               ‘Design’ produces specifications and prototypes, not
                                               execution task lists. “The outputs of the ‘design’
                                               activity serve as an important input to all
                                               subsequent activities of digital product and service
                                               management.” Ref 4.2
6          B          1.2.3                    A. Incorrect. Updating the backlog is part of planning
                                               and prioritization, not resource acquisition. “The key
                                               outputs of this activity include refined backlogs,
                                               updated product roadmaps […].” Ref 3.2.2
                                               B. Correct. The ‘acquire’ activity is about
                                               securing and allocating resources (including
                                               cloud capacity and specialist skills) so that
                                               approved designs and backlog items can be
                                               implemented across the lifecycle. “The purpose



                    ITIL® Product | Sample Paper 1 Answers and Rationales | Copyright © PeopleCert International Limited   5
Question            Answer           Assessment               Rationales
                                     Criteria
                                                              of the ‘acquire’ activity is to secure and allocate
                                                              necessary resources efficiently, ensuring the
                                                              sustainability and scalability of products and
                                                              services.” Ref 5.1.1
                                                              C. Incorrect. Designing how resources are used
                                                              belongs to the ‘design’ activity, not ‘acquire’.” The
                                                              purpose of the ‘design’ activity is to create
                                                              prototypes and specifications for products and
                                                              services, detailing their functionality, user
                                                              experience, and operational framework.” Ref 4.1.1
                                                              D. Incorrect. Deploying features is part of
                                                              ‘transition’, not ‘acquire’. “The purpose of the
                                                              ‘transition’ activity is to seamlessly introduce new or
                                                              updated products and services into operational
                                                              environments and to ensure the effective
                                                              onboarding/offboarding of suppliers.” Ref 7.1.1
7                   A                10.2.1                   A. Correct. The model is intended to categorize
                                                              AI functions based on what they do in service
                                                              management contexts. “The model provides a
                                                              functional classification of AI solutions.” Ref 1.4
                                                              B. Incorrect. The ITIL AI Capability Model does not
                                                              define maturity levels. It defines functional
                                                              categories. “The model provides a functional
                                                              classification of AI solutions.” Ref 1.4
                                                              C. Incorrect. Governance comes in relation to AI
                                                              adoption, but the Capability Model itself does not
                                                              prescribe mandatory controls. “Organizations
                                                              should ensure effective governance of technology
                                                              and data they use and process” This refers to
                                                              governance responsibilities, not the purpose of the
                                                              AI Capability Model. Ref 1.4
                                                              D. D. Incorrect. The model does not measure
                                                              financial return. Its purpose is functional
                                                              understanding and classification. “The model
                                                              provides a functional classification of AI solutions.”
                                                              Ref 1.4
8                   D                2.2.1                    A. Incorrect. Deployed features and service
                                                              catalogue entries are not outputs of ‘discover’. They
                                                              occur after solutions are built and transitioned.
                                                              “Products, services, and resources deployed to the
                                                              target live environment and ready for operation.”
                                                              Ref 7.1, Table 7.1
                                                              B. Incorrect. Testing solution components is part of
                                                              ‘build’, not ‘discover’, of which the key outputs are
                                                              “Built and tested product solutions.”
                                                              Ref 6.1, Table 6.1
                                                              C. Incorrect. Operational performance data and
                                                              incident trends are generated during ‘operate’, not
                                                              ‘discover’, of which the key outputs are “Operating
                                                              products and services; Product performance
                                                              records and reports.” Ref 8.1, Table 8.1
                                                              D. Correct. The ‘discover’ activity produces
                                                              updated product roadmaps and refined backlogs
                                                              at the end of its iterations. “The key outputs of
                                                              this activity include refined backlogs, updated



6   ITIL® Product | Sample Paper 1 Answers and Rationales | Copyright © PeopleCert International Limited
Question   Answer     Assessment               Rationales
                      Criteria
                                               product roadmaps, continual improvement
                                               initiatives, as well as reports and documentation
                                               of findings from the activity.” Ref 3.2.2
9          A          2.2.2                    A. Correct. Assessing the product context means
                                               consolidating external and internal factors (such
                                               as regulations, market conditions, or user
                                               expectations) to understand constraints, drivers,
                                               and opportunities before defining problems or
                                               solutions. “‘Discover’ begins with an assessment
                                               of the current environment. Inputs include
                                               strategic direction, a PESTLE analysis, portfolio
                                               reviews, current roadmaps, backlog
                                               assessments, and feedback from other value
                                               chain activities.” Ref 3.2.1.1
                                               B. Incorrect. Translating findings into detailed
                                               designs belongs to the ‘design’ activity, which follows
                                               discover after context and problems are
                                               understood. The purpose of the ‘design’ activity is to
                                               “create prototypes and specifications for products
                                               and services, detailing their functionality, user
                                               experience, and operational framework.”
                                               Ref 4.1, Table 4.1
                                               C. Incorrect. Selecting platforms and services is part
                                               of obtain/acquire decisions, not an outcome of
                                               assessing product context during discover. “The
                                               purpose of the ‘acquire’ activity is to secure and
                                               allocate necessary resources efficiently, ensuring
                                               the sustainability and scalability of products and
                                               services.” Ref 5.1.1
                                               D. Incorrect. Planning rollout strategies is associated
                                               with transition activities, not with assessing the
                                               product context in discover. “The purpose of the
                                               ‘transition’ activity is to seamlessly introduce new or
                                               updated products and services into operational
                                               environments and to ensure the effective
                                               onboarding/offboarding of suppliers.” Ref 7.1.1
10         D          2.3.1                    A. Incorrect. Deployment frequency is a metric
                                               related to ‘build’ and ‘transition’ activities, not
                                               ‘discover’. “Transition cycle (timeliness and
                                               duration).” Ref 7.1, Table 7.1
                                               B. Incorrect. Mean time to restore service is a
                                               ‘support’/‘operate’ metric, not a ‘discover’ metric.
                                               “Speed of normal service restoration.”
                                               Ref 10.1.1, Table 10.1
                                               C. Incorrect. Automated test coverage relates to
                                               ‘build’ and testing, not ‘discover’. “Quality of the
                                               product solutions.” Ref 6.1, Table 6.1
                                               D. Correct. The purpose of the ‘discover’ activity
                                               is to ensure that products and related service
                                               offerings remain strategically aligned, market-
                                               relevant, and commercially viable. The key
                                               metrics of success are: “Strategic fit of the
                                               organization’s products and service offerings,
                                               market relevance of the products and service
                                               offerings, stakeholder satisfaction with products



                    ITIL® Product | Sample Paper 1 Answers and Rationales | Copyright © PeopleCert International Limited   7
Question            Answer           Assessment               Rationales
                                     Criteria
                                                              and service offerings, commercial success of the
                                                              products (if applicable).” Ref 3.1, Table 3.1
11                  C                2.3.2                    A. Incorrect. Finalizing direction without validating
                                                              assumptions contradicts the purpose of the
                                                              discover activity. “The purpose of the ‘discover’
                                                              activity is to ensure continual alignment of the
                                                              product capabilities and related service offerings
                                                              with the needs of service consumers.” Ref 3.1.1
                                                              B. Incorrect. Deferring validation until later stages
                                                              increases cost and risk; discovery recommendations
                                                              emphasize early validation. “A clear problem
                                                              statement centres the team on value for real users,
                                                              avoiding the common pitfall of investing time and
                                                              money on solutions that don’t have a value
                                                              justification.” Ref 3.1.3
                                                              C. Correct. Challenging assumptions with real
                                                              user evidence is a key practical recommendation
                                                              for effective discovery. “Decisions must be
                                                              grounded in measurable data rather than
                                                              intuition.” Ref 3.4.1
                                                              D. Incorrect. Prioritizing speed over learning
                                                              undermines the purpose of discovery, which
                                                              focuses on reducing uncertainty before design.
                                                              “Delays and a lack of agility at this stage may
                                                              become a source of constraints in other lifecycle
                                                              stages and may ultimately lead to strategic failure of
                                                              the organization.” Ref 3.2
12                  B                3.1.1                    A. Incorrect. Human-centred design does not
                                                              prioritize minimizing iteration or starting from
                                                              technology choices. It prioritizes user understanding
                                                              and learning through iteration. “By grounding
                                                              decisions in validated research, teams avoid
                                                              speculative assumptions that often lead to costly
                                                              redesigns later.” Ref 4.1.3
                                                              B. Correct. Human-centred design in ITIL
                                                              emphasizes understanding users in context,
                                                              testing with real users, and iterating prototypes
                                                              based on feedback. “Human-centred design is a
                                                              structured design approach that places people’s
                                                              needs, capabilities, constraints, and contexts at
                                                              the core of all design decisions.” and through
                                                              “interviews, surveys, field observations, and
                                                              analytics reviews designers refine the
                                                              organization’s understanding of user goals,
                                                              motivations, pain points, and the environmental
                                                              constraints that shape experience.” Ref 4.1.3
                                                              C. Incorrect. Human-centred design in ITIL does not
                                                              assume complete requirements upfront; it relies on
                                                              learning and iteration. “This iterative process
                                                              uncovers usability issues, validates design
                                                              assumptions, and informs refinements before any
                                                              code is written.” Ref 4.1.3
                                                              D. Incorrect. While reuse and consistency are
                                                              supported through design systems, this alone does
                                                              not demonstrate human-centred design unless



8   ITIL® Product | Sample Paper 1 Answers and Rationales | Copyright © PeopleCert International Limited
Question   Answer     Assessment               Rationales
                      Criteria
                                               grounded in user research and testing. “By
                                               providing a shared vocabulary, a design system
                                               accelerates design and development, reduces
                                               duplication of effort, and maintains brand
                                               coherence at scale.” Ref 4.1.3
13         A          10.2.4                   A. Correct. ITIL is positioned as the framework
                                               for digital product and service management,
                                               while DevOps provides complementary practices
                                               and techniques that enhance lifecycle activities.
                                               The collaboration is described as a combination
                                               of ITIL’s framework and DevOps’ methods.
                                               “While ITIL provides a robust framework for
                                               digital product and service management, many
                                               enterprises are now integrating DevOps
                                               practices to accelerate product development
                                               and optimize product operation.” Also, “While
                                               ITIL® provides the framework for effective digital
                                               product and service management, no single
                                               framework is enough for successful work in
                                               today's diverse business and technology
                                               ecosystems.” Ref 12.5.1
                                               B. Incorrect. DevOps is described as an extension
                                               and complementary approach, not something that
                                               is replaced by ITIL processes. “Certifications such as
                                               PRINCE2® (for agile project, programme, and
                                               portfolio management) and those from the DEVOPS
                                               INSTITUTE® (DOI, for agile, continuous product
                                               development and operation) offer powerful
                                               extensions to the ITIL framework.” Ref 12.5
                                               C. Incorrect. DevOps is linked to multiple lifecycle
                                               activities across the ITIL Product and Service
                                               Lifecycle, not restricted to software development
                                               alone. “DevOps is a valuable complementary
                                               approach which should be used as a source of
                                               detailed practical advice enabling such activities of
                                               the ITIL Product and Service Lifecycle as ‘discover’,
                                               ‘design’, ‘acquire’, ‘build’, ‘transition’, and ‘operate’.”
                                               Ref 12.5.1
                                               D. Incorrect. The text clearly positions ITIL as the
                                               framework and DevOps as an extension to it, not as
                                               a governance layer above ITIL. “While ITIL® provides
                                               the framework for effective digital product and
                                               service management, no single framework is
                                               enough for successful work in today's diverse
                                               business and technology ecosystems.” Ref 12.5
14         C          3.2.2                    A. Incorrect. Defining monitoring thresholds is part
                                               of the ‘operate’ activity, not ‘design’. “The purpose of
                                               the ‘operate’ activity is to maintain and monitor
                                               digital products and services and supporting
                                               systems, ensuring optimal performance and
                                               reliability.” Ref 8.1.1
                                               B. Incorrect. Feature prioritization is driven by
                                               discover outputs and portfolio decisions, not by
                                               design steps. “The high-level workflow of the




                    ITIL® Product | Sample Paper 1 Answers and Rationales | Copyright © PeopleCert International Limited   9
Question           Answer           Assessment               Rationales
                                    Criteria
                                                             ‘discover’ activity comprises four steps […] Prioritize
                                                             actions and allocate resources.” Ref 3.2
                                                             C. Correct. Producing architectural designs is a
                                                             key step of the ‘design’ activity. “The ‘design’
                                                             activity translates strategic intent into concrete
                                                             solution designs that can be built, operated, and
                                                             supported effectively by service providers.”
                                                             Ref 4.1.2
                                                             D. Incorrect. Planning phased releases is part of the
                                                             ‘transition’ activity, not design. “The purpose of the
                                                             ‘transition’ activity is to seamlessly introduce new or
                                                             updated products and services into operational
                                                             environments […].” Ref 7.1.1
15                 A                3.3.1                    A. Correct. A critical success factor of the ‘design’
                                                             activity is early and ongoing cross-functional
                                                             collaboration, especially with teams responsible
                                                             for ‘build’, ‘transition’, ‘operate’, ‘deliver’, and
                                                             ‘support’, to prevent downstream rework.
                                                             “Cross-disciplinary collaboration and shared
                                                             ownership.” Ref 4.4.3, Table 4.5
                                                             B. Incorrect. Increasing deployment frequency is not
                                                             a ‘design’ improvement action; it relates to
                                                             ‘transition’ or ‘operate’. “The purpose of the
                                                             ‘transition’ activity is to seamlessly introduce new or
                                                             updated products and services into operational
                                                             environments […].” Ref 7.1.1
                                                             C. Incorrect. Automation improves ‘build’ efficiency
                                                             but does not directly address design effectiveness
                                                             or rework. “The ‘build’ activity can and should be
                                                             highly automated, enabling continuous integration.”
                                                             Ref 6.1.3
                                                             D. Incorrect. Analysis of live service incidents
                                                             belongs to ‘operate’ and ‘support’, not ‘design’.
                                                             “Product performance records and reports.”
                                                             Ref 8.1, Table 8.1
16                 A                3.3.2                    A. Correct. Applying iterative validation ensures
                                                             designs remain aligned with real needs and
                                                             constraints. “The design of digital products is
                                                             performed in iterations and experiments, and
                                                             includes checkpoints with service providers and
                                                             users.” Ref 4.1.2.3
                                                             B. Incorrect. Freezing the design early to reduce
                                                             rework contradicts the iterative and experimental
                                                             nature of effective design, which includes validation
                                                             checkpoints before finalization. “The design of
                                                             digital products is performed in iterations and
                                                             experiments, and includes checkpoints with service
                                                             providers and users.” Ref 4.1.2.3
                                                             C. Incorrect. Delegating design decisions without
                                                             shared validation undermines collaboration and
                                                             design quality. “Effective design emerges from
                                                             collaboration among product managers, developers,
                                                             engineers, researchers, and marketers.” Ref 4.4.1
                                                             D. Incorrect. Restricting design input to
                                                             documentation alone ignores learning through



10   ITIL® Product | Sample Paper 1 Answers and Rationales | Copyright © PeopleCert International Limited
Question   Answer   Assessment               Rationales
                    Criteria
                                             interaction and feedback, which is discouraged.
                                             “Designers make no assumptions that work done
                                             through the ‘discover’ activity is complete, accurate,
                                             or even still valid.” Ref 4.2.1.1
17         C        8.1.2                    A. Incorrect. Service request management focuses
                                             on fulfilling user requests rather than defining,
                                             monitoring, or reporting overall service quality.
                                             “Service request management: Fulfilling service
                                             requests.” Ref 9.3 Table 9.2
                                             B. Incorrect. Knowledge management supports
                                             delivery by organizing and providing knowledge, but
                                             it does not define or monitor service quality.
                                             “Knowledge management: Captures, organizes, and
                                             provides service-related knowledge and advice.”
                                             Ref 9.3 Table 9.3
                                             C. Correct. Service level management is the
                                             practice responsible for managing and reporting
                                             service quality, directly aligning with defining,
                                             monitoring, and reporting service performance
                                             during delivery. “Service level management:
                                             Managing and reporting of service quality.”
                                             Ref 9.3 Table 9.2
                                             D. Incorrect. Monitoring and event management
                                             tracks service delivery performance but does not
                                             define or manage service quality commitments.
                                             “Monitoring and event management: Monitoring
                                             and reporting service delivery.” Ref 9.3 Table 9.2
18         D        4.2.1                    A. Incorrect. Approved designs and architectural
                                             models are outputs of the ‘design’ activity, not
                                             ‘acquire’. “Product specifications and prototypes.”
                                             Ref 4.1, Table 4.1
                                             B. Incorrect. Integrated and tested components are
                                             outputs of the ‘build’ activity. “Built and tested
                                             product solutions.” Ref 6.1, Table 6.1
                                             C. Incorrect. Deployed services are outputs of
                                             ‘transition’ and ‘delivery’ activities. “Products,
                                             services, and resources deployed to the target live
                                             environment and ready for operation.”
                                             Ref 7.1, Table 7.1
                                             D. Correct. The ‘acquire’ activity is completed
                                             when resources and services have been secured
                                             and allocated, and agreements are in place,
                                             enabling subsequent ‘build’ and ‘operate’
                                             activities. “The key outputs are: approved
                                             resource requests, new or modified agreements
                                             (SLA, Terms and Conditions, licence agreements),
                                             new and modified configuration items and
                                             assets, new partners or suppliers.” Ref 5.2.2
19         C        4.2.2                    A. Incorrect. Deployment speed is a ‘transition’
                                             concern and does not provide sufficient insight into
                                             suitability or sustainability of sourcing options. The
                                             ‘acquire’ “activity aims to quickly identify and
                                             allocate necessary resources to optimize the value
                                             outcomes of new and modified products while
                                             minimizing waste and expense.” Ref 5.1.1


                ITIL® Product | Sample Paper 1 Answers and Rationales | Copyright © PeopleCert International Limited   11
Question           Answer           Assessment               Rationales
                                    Criteria
                                                             B. Incorrect. Cost is an important factor, but
                                                             selecting solely on cost ignores capability,
                                                             compliance, and integration risks emphasized in the
                                                             ‘acquire’ activity. “Total cost of ownership: what are
                                                             the costs over the lifecycle of the product for
                                                             licences, support, training, deprecation, and
                                                             replacement?” Ref 5.1.4
                                                             C. Correct. Evaluating options holistically against
                                                             these criteria demonstrates correct application
                                                             of the sourcing assessment step. “When this
                                                             happens, sourcing options must be assessed,
                                                             and new contracts or agreements need to be
                                                             arranged.” Ref 5.1.3
                                                             D. Incorrect. Delivery team preference alone does
                                                             not address strategic, regulatory, or lifecycle
                                                             considerations required when assessing sourcing
                                                             options. “Clear communication of the decision
                                                             matrix, ownership of budgets, and portfolio and
                                                             procurement management policies allow the
                                                             appropriate decisions to be made […]” Ref 5.1.3
20                 C                4.3.1                    A. Incorrect. Automation of build and test activities
                                                             belongs to ‘build’, not ‘acquire’. “The ‘build’ activity
                                                             can and should be highly automated, enabling
                                                             continuous integration.” Ref 6.1.3
                                                             B. Incorrect. Accelerating approvals for releases
                                                             relates to ‘transition’, not ‘acquire’. “The purpose of
                                                             the ‘transition’ activity is to seamlessly introduce
                                                             new or updated products and services into
                                                             operational environments […].” Ref 7.1.1
                                                             C. Correct. A critical success factor of the
                                                             ‘acquire’ activity is ensuring that resources and
                                                             suppliers are secured in alignment with the
                                                             product roadmap and timelines. Delivery delays
                                                             caused by unavailable tools and services directly
                                                             indicate poor coordination in ‘acquire’.
                                                             “Adherence to the product roadmap and other
                                                             relevant guidelines.” Ref 5.1, Table 5.1
                                                             D. Incorrect. Incident resolution speed is a ‘support’
                                                             concern, not related to ‘acquire’ delays. “Speed of
                                                             normal service restoration.” Ref 10.1.1, Table 10.1
21                 B                4.3.2                    A. Incorrect. Full standardization may ignore
                                                             regulatory constraints and contradicts effective
                                                             acquisition guidance. “Regulations, standards,
                                                             insurers, and investors may constrain most
                                                             acquisition choices about digital products and their
                                                             required capabilities for storage, transit, use,
                                                             security, categorization, and retention of data and
                                                             information.” Ref 5.1.4
                                                             B. Correct. A key practical recommendation for
                                                             effective acquisition is to consider regulatory,
                                                             compliance, and integration requirements early,
                                                             before committing to suppliers. Addressing
                                                             these factors early reduces risk and rework.
                                                             “When acquiring these resources externally, it is
                                                             especially important to consider intellectual



12   ITIL® Product | Sample Paper 1 Answers and Rationales | Copyright © PeopleCert International Limited
Question   Answer   Assessment               Rationales
                    Criteria
                                             property rights, data ownership and sovereignty,
                                             and global compliance and regulations.” Ref 5.1.4
                                             C. Incorrect. Independent contracting without
                                             coordination increases fragmentation and risk.
                                             “Clear communication of the decision matrix,
                                             ownership of budgets, and portfolio and
                                             procurement management policies allow the
                                             appropriate decisions to be made […]” Ref 5.1.3
                                             D. Incorrect. Addressing compliance after go-live
                                             exposes the organization to avoidable risk. “Careful
                                             consideration should be taken to determine if these
                                             resources should be acquired externally or
                                             assembled internally. […] especially important to
                                             consider […] global compliance and regulations.”
                                             Ref 5.1.4
22         D        5.1.1                    A. Incorrect. Build activities are not independent of
                                             design; design prepares solutions so they can be
                                             built and supported effectively. “The ‘design’ activity
                                             translates strategic intent into concrete solution
                                             designs that can be built, operated, and supported
                                             effectively by service providers, while enabling the
                                             intended outcomes for end users.” Ref 4.1.2
                                             B. Incorrect. ‘Design’ produces implementation-
                                             ready artefacts, not just early planning outputs.
                                             “Product specifications and prototypes.”
                                             Ref 4.1, Table 4.1
                                             C. Incorrect. Validating user needs is primarily part
                                             of ‘discover’, while ‘build’ focuses on developing
                                             solutions based on ‘design’. “The purpose of the
                                             ‘discover’ activity is to ensure continual alignment of
                                             the product capabilities and related service offerings
                                             with the needs of service consumers and with the
                                             organizational strategy.” Ref 3.1.1
                                             D. Correct. ‘Build’ depends on ‘design’ outputs,
                                             and ‘design’ outputs are inputs to subsequent
                                             lifecycle management activities, showing tight
                                             coordination. “The outputs of the ‘design’
                                             activity serve as an important input to all
                                             subsequent activities of digital product and
                                             service management.” Ref 4.2
23         D        5.2.1                    A. Incorrect. ‘Design’ specifications and prototypes
                                             are outputs of the ‘design’ activity, not of ‘build’.
                                             “Product specifications and prototypes.” Ref 4.1,
                                             Table 4.1
                                             B. Incorrect. Contracted services and allocated
                                             resources are outputs of the ‘acquire’ activity.
                                             “Acquired resources and services.” Ref 5.1, Table 5.1
                                             C. Incorrect. Operational reports and incident data
                                             are produced during the ‘operate’ activity.
                                             “Operating products and services. Product
                                             performance records and reports.” Ref 8.1, Table 8.1
                                             D. Correct. The ‘build’ activity produces built and
                                             tested product solutions, which are then ready
                                             to move into ‘transition’. “Built and tested
                                             product solutions.” Ref 6.1, Table 6.1



                ITIL® Product | Sample Paper 1 Answers and Rationales | Copyright © PeopleCert International Limited   13
Question           Answer           Assessment               Rationales
                                    Criteria
24                 A                5.2.2                    A. Correct. The first step of the ‘build’ activity is
                                                             assessing the solution design to ensure that
                                                             what will be built aligns with the approved
                                                             design specifications and expected outcomes
                                                             before development begins. This includes
                                                             structuring build work so that components
                                                             clearly reflect the agreed design. The steps of
                                                             the ‘build’ activity are: “Assess solution design.
                                                             Plan building and testing and confirm resource
                                                             availability. Execute building and testing plans.
                                                             Deliver solutions and supporting
                                                             documentation.” Ref 6.2, 6.2.1.1
                                                             B. Incorrect. Scheduling deployment windows is part
                                                             of the ‘transition’ activity, not the ‘build’ activity. “The
                                                             purpose of the ‘transition’ activity is to seamlessly
                                                             introduce new or updated products and services
                                                             into operational environments […].” Ref 7.1.1
                                                             C. Incorrect. Training support teams are associated
                                                             with transition and support readiness, not build. “A
                                                             key aspect of product-level transition is training and
                                                             enablement for both service provider staff and,
                                                             where appropriate, customer personnel.” Ref 7.1.2.2
                                                             D. Incorrect. Feature prioritization is driven by
                                                             discovery and portfolio decisions, not performed as
                                                             a step within ‘build’. “The high-level workflow of the
                                                             ‘discover’ activity comprises four steps […]. Prioritize
                                                             actions and allocate resources.” Ref 3.2
25                 B                5.3.1                    A. Incorrect. This is about release approval speed,
                                                             which is a primary reason for collaboration in the
                                                             ‘build’ activity. The ‘build’ activity is concerned with
                                                             constructing and validating solutions so that they
                                                             are technically sound and ready for subsequent
                                                             lifecycle stages. While release speed may be
                                                             influenced by good build practices, collaboration is
                                                             not a mechanism for accelerating approvals. “The
                                                             goal of assessing the solution design is to ensure:
                                                             That the design requirements are clear and that the
                                                             build specifications will contribute the expected
                                                             value.” Ref 6.2.1.1
                                                             B. Correct. ‘Build’ requires coordination between
                                                             product managers, business analysts, architects,
                                                             and development teams to break down design
                                                             into build units and ensure feasibility,
                                                             verifiability, and integration readiness.
                                                             Collaboration is essential to confirm that the
                                                             ‘build’ model is fit for purpose and that
                                                             outcomes can be validated through testing. “The
                                                             build requirements are discussed with the
                                                             product manager, business analysts and
                                                             technical and architectural leads. The goal of the
                                                             solution design assessment is to break the
                                                             solution design into specific build specifications
                                                             and build units.” Ref 6.2.1.1
                                                             C. Incorrect. Prioritization of product ideas is not a
                                                             core objective of ‘build’. That activity is handled



14   ITIL® Product | Sample Paper 1 Answers and Rationales | Copyright © PeopleCert International Limited
Question   Answer   Assessment               Rationales
                    Criteria
                                             earlier in the lifecycle (particularly in ‘discover’ and
                                             ‘design’). Executing is based on defined
                                             specifications. The emphasis is on transforming
                                             ‘design’ into ‘build’ units and ensuring technical
                                             feasibility. “A key concept of waterfall models is
                                             structuring the build specifications and build units
                                             sequentially from start to finish to facilitate aligning
                                             and scheduling resources and dependencies and
                                             ensure a continual progression from ‘design’ to
                                             ‘operate’.” Ref 6.2.1.1
                                             D. Incorrect. Customer communication during
                                             service delivery and operation belongs to later
                                             lifecycle stages such as ‘deliver’ and ‘operate’, not
                                             ‘build’. The focus here is on development execution,
                                             technical validation, and readiness for transition.
                                             While ‘build’ output eventually affects customers,
                                             the collaboration is internal and technical in nature.
                                             “How, and by whom, will the solution be
                                             transitioned, operated, delivered, and supported?”
                                             Ref 6.2.1
26         A        8.2.2                    A. Correct. The scenario describes reviewing
                                             existing SLAs and onboarding procedures before
                                             activating the feature. This corresponds
                                             precisely to the first step of the ‘deliver’ activity,
                                             which requires reviewing commitments defined
                                             in service agreements prior to delivery
                                             execution. “‘Deliver’ begins by reviewing the
                                             commitments defined in service agreements.
                                             This includes assessing SLAs, service requests,
                                             and events that may impact delivery. The goal is
                                             to ensure that delivery is grounded in clearly
                                             defined expectations and that any risks to
                                             performance or availability are identified early.”
                                             Ref 9.2.1.1
                                             B. Incorrect. This step occurs after commitments
                                             have been reviewed and clarified. It involves
                                             confirming procedures, tools, and resource
                                             availability. The scenario does not describe
                                             confirming delivery plans or resource allocation.
                                             “Once commitments are clear, providers create or
                                             adapt a delivery plan. This involves confirming the
                                             procedures, tools, and resources (such as staff,
                                             suppliers, and automation capabilities) required to
                                             meet commitments. Plans also establish roles and
                                             responsibilities to ensure accountability during
                                             delivery.” Ref 9.2.1.2
                                             C. Incorrect. Execution occurs only after assessment
                                             and planning have been completed. The feature has
                                             not yet been activated; therefore, delivery execution
                                             has not started. “The final step is execution: fulfilling
                                             service requests, carrying out onboarding and
                                             offboarding, or completing scheduled service
                                             actions. Delivery does not end with fulfilment; it also
                                             involves capturing evidence, reporting outcomes,
                                             and gathering user feedback.” Ref 9.2.1.3



                ITIL® Product | Sample Paper 1 Answers and Rationales | Copyright © PeopleCert International Limited   15
Question           Answer           Assessment               Rationales
                                    Criteria
                                                             D. Incorrect. Incident capture and recovery actions
                                                             belong to the ‘support’ activity, which is triggered
                                                             when incidents or disruptions occur. The scenario
                                                             describes preparatory review, not incident
                                                             response. “The purpose of the ‘support’ activity is to
                                                             identify and resolve incidents, fulfil disaster recovery
                                                             procedures, and capture consumer’s feedback.”
                                                             Ref 10.1.1
27                 C                6.1.1                    A. Incorrect. This describes a single “big-bang”
                                                             release. But ‘transition’ can involve many updates
                                                             deployed in a short timeframe. “In a digital product
                                                             environment, the ‘transition’ activity may be highly
                                                             or fully automated, allowing for many product or
                                                             component updates to be deployed in a short
                                                             timeframe.” Ref 7.2
                                                             B. Incorrect. This describes a single release event.
                                                             ‘Transition’ happens as frequently as needed,
                                                             triggered by new built solutions or acquired
                                                             resources. “As frequently as needed, triggered by
                                                             built solutions or acquired resources and services
                                                             (subject to the organization’s deployment policies
                                                             and guidelines).” Ref 7.1, Table 7.1
                                                             C. Correct. It is suggested that ‘transition’ takes
                                                             place in incremental and phased releases to
                                                             reduce risk and enable learning and adjustment
                                                             between releases. “In a digital product
                                                             environment, the ‘transition’ activity may be
                                                             highly or fully automated, allowing for many
                                                             product or component updates to be deployed in
                                                             a short timeframe.” Ref 7.2
                                                             D. Incorrect. ‘Transition’ as triggered by built
                                                             solutions/acquired resources and is performed as
                                                             frequently as needed. ‘Transition’ is part of getting
                                                             things into the live environment. “As frequently as
                                                             needed, triggered by built solutions or acquired
                                                             resources and services (subject to the organization’s
                                                             deployment policies and guidelines).”
                                                             Ref 7.1, Table 7.1
28                 C                6.2.1                    A. Incorrect. Design specifications and architecture
                                                             models are outputs of ‘design’, not ‘transition’ or
                                                             ‘support’. The key outputs for the ‘design’ activity are
                                                             “Product specifications and prototypes.”
                                                             Ref 4.1, Table 4.1
                                                             B. Incorrect. Supplier contracts and allocated
                                                             resources are outputs of ‘acquire’, not related to
                                                             post-transition usability or ‘support’. The key
                                                             outputs for the ‘acquire’ activity are “Acquired
                                                             resources and services.” Ref 5.1, Table 5.1
                                                             C. Correct. After ‘transition’, a product must be
                                                             usable and supportable. Operational
                                                             documentation, knowledge, and support
                                                             readiness enable effective use and ongoing
                                                             support. “Each ‘transition’ cycle addresses both
                                                             the knowns and unknowns: ensuring that
                                                             environments are ready, documentation is



16   ITIL® Product | Sample Paper 1 Answers and Rationales | Copyright © PeopleCert International Limited
Question   Answer   Assessment               Rationales
                    Criteria
                                             complete, dependencies are satisfied, and teams
                                             are aligned.” Ref 7.2.1
                                             D. Incorrect. Defect logs are associated with ‘build’,
                                             not with ensuring effective use and support after
                                             transition. The key outputs for the ‘build’ activity are
                                             “Built and tested product solutions.”
                                             Ref 6.1, Table 6.1
29         C        6.2.2                    A. Incorrect. Checking the live environment after
                                             release is reactive and occurs too late. Transition
                                             preparation is about ensuring readiness before
                                             execution, not post-release validation. “The purpose
                                             of the ‘transition’ activity is to seamlessly introduce
                                             new or updated products and services into
                                             operational environments […].” Ref 7.1.1
                                             B. Incorrect. Post-transition debriefs occur after
                                             execution, not during preparation. They are
                                             valuable, but they do not convert assessment
                                             outputs into actionable readiness. “Within one to
                                             two days, a post-transition debrief takes place to
                                             capture lessons learned, recognize achievements,
                                             and identify improvement opportunities.” Ref 7.2.1.3
                                             C. Correct. After assessing solutions and
                                             transition requirements, the next core
                                             transition step is to plan transition activities and
                                             confirm resource availability. “The four steps of
                                             the ‘transition’ activity are: Assess solutions and
                                             transition requirements. Plan transition
                                             activities and confirm resource availability.
                                             Execute transition plans. Communicate
                                             transition results to stakeholders.” Ref 7.2
                                             D. Incorrect. Transition results reporting happens
                                             after transition execution, not during preparation.
                                             “Communicate transition results to stakeholders.”
                                             Ref 7.2
30         B        6.3.2                    A. Incorrect. Assuming automatic alignment
                                             increases risk and contradicts structured handoff
                                             guidance. “Transition is not just about deployment.
                                             It’s about preparing the entire ecosystem to run.”
                                             Ref 7.1.1
                                             B. Correct. The scenario highlights that “supplier
                                             onboarding was critical,” and the guidance
                                             recommends formalizing ownership and
                                             escalation paths to avoid post-transition
                                             instability. “Onboarding suppliers is also
                                             considered a form of transition.” and
                                             “’Transition’ includes ensuring that the new or
                                             updated products are integrated into the live
                                             environment and are ready for product
                                             operation and service delivery.” Ref 7.1
                                             C. Incorrect. Contract management alone does not
                                             ensure operational readiness. “This activity ensures
                                             that what was built can be operated. It includes
                                             planning, testing, onboarding, documentation
                                             handovers, risk mitigation, and cultural alignment




                ITIL® Product | Sample Paper 1 Answers and Rationales | Copyright © PeopleCert International Limited   17
Question           Answer           Assessment               Rationales
                                    Criteria
                                                             between teams. The ‘transition’ activity may also
                                                             involve onboarding external suppliers […]” Ref 7.1.1
                                                             D. Incorrect. Waiting for issues to occur contradicts
                                                             proactive transition practices. “A successful
                                                             transition means that a product solution goes live in
                                                             a meaningful, observable, supportable, and
                                                             sustainable way.” Ref 7.1.1
31                 C                7.1.2                    A. Incorrect. Deployment management concerns
                                                             moving components into live environments. It does
                                                             not primarily provide visibility into the health and
                                                             performance of live products and services.
                                                             “Deployment management practice:
                                                             The practice of moving new or changed hardware,
                                                             software, documentation, processes, or any other
                                                             service component to one of the controlled
                                                             environments.” Ref Glossary
                                                             B. Incorrect. Release management ensures
                                                             availability of new or changed services. It does not
                                                             primarily monitor or provide visibility into
                                                             operational health and performance. “Release
                                                             management practice: The practice of making new
                                                             and changed services and features available for
                                                             use.” Ref Glossary
                                                             C. Correct. This practice directly enables visibility
                                                             into the health and performance of live products
                                                             and services. “Monitoring and event
                                                             management: Monitoring and reporting of the
                                                             service’s operational status, processing of
                                                             events.” Ref 8.3, Table 8.2
                                                             D. Incorrect. Business analysis focuses on defining
                                                             needs and requirements, not on operational
                                                             monitoring. “Business analysis practice: The practice
                                                             of analysing a business or some element of a
                                                             business, defining its needs and recommending
                                                             solutions to address these needs and/or solve a
                                                             business problem, and create value for
                                                             stakeholders. Ref Glossary
32                 D                7.2.1                    A. Incorrect. Roadmaps and backlogs are outputs of
                                                             ‘discover’, not ‘operate’. “The key outputs of this
                                                             activity include refined backlogs, updated product
                                                             roadmaps, continual improvement initiatives, as
                                                             well as reports and documentation of findings from
                                                             the activity.” Ref 3.2.2
                                                             B. Incorrect. Supplier contracts and allocated
                                                             resources are outputs of ‘acquire’, not ‘operate’. The
                                                             key outputs of this activity are “Acquired resources
                                                             and services.” Ref 5.1, Table 5.1
                                                             C. Incorrect. Prototyping and design changes belong
                                                             to the ‘design’ activity. The key outputs of this
                                                             activity are “Product specifications and prototypes.”
                                                             Ref 4.1, Table 4.1
                                                             D. Correct. The ‘operate’ activity is concerned
                                                             with running products and services in live
                                                             environments and monitoring their
                                                             performance. Its outputs therefore include



18   ITIL® Product | Sample Paper 1 Answers and Rationales | Copyright © PeopleCert International Limited
Question   Answer   Assessment               Rationales
                    Criteria
                                             operational data and performance information,
                                             showing how well products and services are
                                             functioning during use. The key outputs of this
                                             activity are “Operating products and services.
                                             Product performance records and reports.”
                                             Ref 8.1, Table 8.1
33         C        7.2.2                    A. Incorrect. Ignoring recurring errors contradicts
                                             the intent of daily health checks and early detection.
                                             “An important trend in digital product operations is
                                             the shift from reactive to proactive approach and to
                                             closer integration with other stages of the digital
                                             product and service lifecycle.” Ref 8.1
                                             B. Incorrect. Delaying action increases risk and does
                                             not align with immediate execution guidance.
                                             “Effective product operation is a key factor of service
                                             reliability.” Ref 8.1
                                             C. Correct. This directly reflects execution of
                                             operational plans and reporting. ‘Operate’
                                             includes routine operational tasks such as
                                             monitoring and maintenance that prevent
                                             incidents: “This includes routine operational
                                             tasks such as monitoring, performance tuning,
                                             backups, housekeeping, and technical
                                             maintenance that prevent incidents and service
                                             degradation.” Also, “When the health‑check
                                             surfaces an issue, it is escalated according to a
                                             predefined runbook.” Ref 8.1.2, Ref 8.2.1.3
                                             D. Incorrect. Disabling alerts contradicts the
                                             purpose of monitoring during ‘operate’, which is to
                                             capture and process events, not suppress them. The
                                             ‘operate’ activity: “Monitoring of the product health,
                                             Capturing and processing relevant events.”
                                             Ref 2.1.1, Table 2.1.
34         C        7.3.2                    A. Incorrect. Introducing AI without structured data
                                             risks amplifying noise rather than improving
                                             operations. “Many organizations try to implement AI
                                             before organizing their operational data landscape.”
                                             Ref 8.4.3
                                             B. Incorrect. Raising thresholds may hide symptoms
                                             but does not address underlying data quality issues.
                                             “The architecture of data, the modelling of
                                             observability, and proper event hygiene must all
                                             come first.” Ref 8.4.3
                                             C. Correct. The guidance states that data
                                             architecture, modelling, and event hygiene must
                                             come before any AIOps initiative to avoid failure.
                                             “Many organizations try to implement AI before
                                             organizing their operational data landscape.”
                                             Ref 8.4.3
                                             D. Incorrect. Replacing tools without addressing
                                             data quality repeats the same operational
                                             weaknesses. “Buying tools because they’re trendy,
                                             without a clear outcome in mind, is a fast track to
                                             failure.” Ref 8.4.3




                ITIL® Product | Sample Paper 1 Answers and Rationales | Copyright © PeopleCert International Limited   19
Question           Answer           Assessment               Rationales
                                    Criteria
35                 A                9.1.2                    A. Correct. The ‘support’ activity handles user
                                                             issues, requests, and queries. The practice that
                                                             directly performs this function is the service
                                                             desk, which acts as the primary point of contact
                                                             between users and the organization. “Service
                                                             desk: Communicating with users requiring
                                                             support.” Ref 10.3, Table 10.2
                                                             B. Incorrect. Service level management focuses on
                                                             agreements and targets, not handling user queries.
                                                             It ensures that “recovery times and resolutions align,
                                                             and feedback is gathered for continual
                                                             improvement.” Ref 10.3, Table 10.2
                                                             C. Incorrect. Release management ensures
                                                             controlled introduction of changes but does not
                                                             directly manage user issues or queries. “Release
                                                             management: Ensuring that changes and releases
                                                             are introduced in a controlled way that support
                                                             teams can manage.” Ref 10.3, Table 10.2
                                                             D. Incorrect. Problem management focuses on root
                                                             causes, not direct handling of queries. It is often
                                                             “Investigating incidents, detecting product and
                                                             service errors and initiating improvements.”
                                                             Ref 10.3, Table 10.2
36                 C                9.2.2                    A. Incorrect. This is a metric of ‘operate’, not an
                                                             output of ‘support’. “Live products’ reliability,
                                                             performance, and information security.”
                                                             Ref 8.1, Table 8.1
                                                             B. Incorrect. This is a key output of ‘build’. “Built and
                                                             tested product solutions.” Ref 6.1, Table 6.1
                                                             C. Correct. The ‘support’ activity’s contribution to
                                                             the digital product and service lifecycle is not
                                                             just keeping services running, but capturing
                                                             knowledge and insights from user interactions,
                                                             incidents, and service requests, which then
                                                             inform continual improvement across the
                                                             lifecycle. “The ‘support’ activity aims to restore
                                                             normal work and use of the product and related
                                                             services as quickly and safely as possible when
                                                             something goes wrong or when users need help,
                                                             while learning from each case to prevent
                                                             recurrence. This includes structured processes
                                                             for handling incidents and disasters, as well as
                                                             integration with problem management and
                                                             continual improvement.” Ref 10.1.2
                                                             D. Incorrect. This is the outcome of ‘transition’.
                                                             “Products, services, and resources deployed to the
                                                             target live environment and ready for operation.”
                                                             Ref 7.1, Table 7.1




20   ITIL® Product | Sample Paper 1 Answers and Rationales | Copyright © PeopleCert International Limited
Question   Answer   Assessment               Rationales
                    Criteria
37         D        9.2.1                    A. Incorrect. That action belongs to the first step, not
                                             the final step. Step 1 is “Identify and assess incidents
                                             and disasters.” Ref 10.2
                                             B. Incorrect. Blame-focused reviews undermine
                                             systemic improvement and psychological safety.
                                             “The ‘support’ activity aims to restore normal work
                                             and use of the product and related services as
                                             quickly and safely as possible when something goes
                                             wrong or when users need help, while learning from
                                             each case to prevent recurrence.” Ref 10.1.2
                                             C. Incorrect. Adjusting alerts may help detection but
                                             does not address root causes or learning. “All
                                             improvement items, from updating run-books to
                                             fine-tuning anomaly thresholds, are automatically
                                             entered into the backlog.” Ref 10.2.1.3
                                             D. Correct. The ‘support’ activity concludes with
                                             structured reviews, metrics analysis, and logging
                                             improvement actions into backlogs to prevent
                                             recurrence. “Review and report support actions.”
                                             Ref 10.2
38         B        9.3.2                    A. Incorrect. Delaying communication increases
                                             frustration and contradicts effective support
                                             practices. “Once an incident is classified, the
                                             responsible lead activates […] external
                                             communication, and security for breach
                                             considerations.” Ref 10.2.1.2
                                             B. Correct. Engaging users during an incident and
                                             restoring service using structured support
                                             pathways aligns directly with these
                                             recommendations. “Provide real-time status
                                             indicators for ongoing incidents, giving users
                                             immediate visibility into whether their issue is
                                             isolated or part of a larger outage.” Also, “offer
                                             multiple resolution pathways (self-serve, guided
                                             walkthroughs, or live agent chat), allowing users
                                             to choose the level of assistance that matches
                                             their comfort and urgency.” Ref 10.4.3
                                             C. Incorrect. Escalating to product design before
                                             restoring service does not align with immediate
                                             incident response actions. Product improvements
                                             follow resolution rather than replace it. “Integrate
                                             the survey insights into the product roadmap
                                             backlog, ensuring that recurring pain points are
                                             addressed by product teams rather than being
                                             endlessly patched by support.” Ref 10.4.3
                                             D. Incorrect. Ignoring user communication
                                             undermines trust during incidents. “For every third-
                                             party component (such as a payment gateway, CDN,
                                             or SaaS API),[…] stakeholders and customers receive
                                             consistent, timely updates.” Ref 10.4.1




                ITIL® Product | Sample Paper 1 Answers and Rationales | Copyright © PeopleCert International Limited   21
Question           Answer           Assessment               Rationales
                                    Criteria
39                 B                10.1.5                   A. Incorrect. This has to do with ‘support’, not
                                                             product management. “Resolving incidents and
                                                             restoring normal product operation and service
                                                             delivery” Ref 10.3, Table 10.2
                                                             B. Correct. Effective digital product management
                                                             is cross-functional and dependent on ongoing
                                                             collaboration across roles. This is reinforced as a
                                                             critical success factor across lifecycle
                                                             management activities (especially ‘design’ and
                                                             ‘build’). “Customers, product managers,
                                                             designers, engineers, service professionals, and
                                                             other stakeholders must collaborate early and
                                                             often, and make their work visible.” Ref 3.4.1
                                                             C. Incorrect. This has to do with ‘operate’. A key
                                                             output is “Product performance records and
                                                             reports.” Ref 8.1, Table 8.1
                                                             D. Incorrect. Effective product management embeds
                                                             governance into everyday delivery work rather than
                                                             relying on centralized formal approval of every
                                                             product change. “Policy-as-code, data-lineage and
                                                             model-governance controls, and standardized
                                                             decision-rights documented in a concise governance
                                                             handbook embed compliance and ethics into
                                                             everyday delivery work.” Ref 11.1
40                 B                10.1.3                   A. Incorrect. Value streams may include only the
                                                             activities required to create value in a given context.
                                                             Value streams “are the actual sequence of activities
                                                             performed, rather than a predetermined blueprint.”
                                                             This indicates that not all value streams include
                                                             every lifecycle stage. Ref 11.4
                                                             B. Correct. Value streams are contextual and
                                                             flexible. They are defined based on how value is
                                                             created and consumed, not as fixed sequences.
                                                             “Organizations select the product and service
                                                             management activities they will be responsible
                                                             for, and this defines their service offering.”
                                                             Ref 11.4.1
                                                             C. Incorrect. Value streams differ based on
                                                             organizational context and operating model. Real
                                                             "world workflows, although based on established
                                                             processes and other workflows, are always unique.”
                                                             Ref 11.4
                                                             D. Incorrect. Value streams are designed to align
                                                             with value creation and business models, not to
                                                             optimize internal efficiency in isolation. “Value
                                                             stream mapping and management optimize the
                                                             flow of work and value creation for customers and
                                                             other stakeholders.” Ref 11.4.4




22   ITIL® Product | Sample Paper 1 Answers and Rationales | Copyright © PeopleCert International Limited
Notes




        ITIL® Product | Sample Paper 1 Answers and Rationales | Copyright © PeopleCert International Limited   23
Thank you
for completing this course!
Please take a few minutes to give us your feedback on your
experiences and learning from the course by completing
the online course evaluation survey here.




                                    PeopleCert has been accredited by Lloyd’s Register,
                                    UK (now LRQA), in accordance with ISO 14001 for
    ESG                             Environmental Management since 2006. Recognized
    Commitment                      through numerous awards, we remain committed to
                                    ESG leadership and the preservation of our planet.
